Explicit orientation field for polygon winding (#74)
opengeospatial/geoparquet: format-specs/geoparquet.md

| ---------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| encoding | string | **REQUIRED** Name of the geometry encoding format. Currently only 'WKB' is supported. |
| geometry_type | string or \[string] | **REQUIRED** The geometry type(s) of all geometries, or 'Unknown' if they are not known.  |

> | orientation | string | ***REQUIRED** if edges='spherical', otherwise **OPTIONAL** Winding order of outer ring of polygons; interior rings are wound in opposite order. If present must be "counterclockwise". If absent, no assertions are made regarding the winding order.

Reviewer: +1 on making this optional. Definitely want to add something about spherical and orientation, but may be a bit better to mention that in the edges field.

["Polygon", "MultiPolygon"]. Or if having 3D points, it is not sufficient to
specify "Point", but it is expected to list "Point Z".

> #### orientation

Reviewer: I think we should explain the edges=spherical case in this section a bit more. Like make it clear that we expect all spherical edges to be counterclockwise. I think that's where we ended? Even if that's not quite right I think we should re-explain what the table mentions - I believe the table should be an 'overview' of what you need to know, and the section should be a more in depth explanation, and shouldn't require you to look up at the table for all the information (like the fact that if edges=spherical then this is required)

This attribute indicates the winding order of polygon. Available values are:

> - counterclockwise: the winding order of polygons follows the [GeoJSON spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7946#section-3.1.6). All vertices of exterior polygon rings MUST be ordered in the counterclockwise direction and all interior rings MUST be ordered in the clockwise direction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "counterclockwise": the winding order of polygons follows the [GeoJSON spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7946#section-3.1.6). All vertices of exterior polygon rings MUST be ordered in the counterclockwise direction and all interior rings MUST be ordered in the clockwise direction.
```

> - counterclockwise: the winding order of polygons follows the [GeoJSON spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7946#section-3.1.6). Polygon rings MUST follow the right-hand rule for orientation (counterclockwise external rings, clockwise internal rings).  Traversing vertices of rings in order, the interior of the polygon is on the left.

Reviewer: Could be nice to explain a bit more what winding order is. If there's a good web page on it then perhaps just a link to it. 

Also I feel like we should start with describing the rule, and then mention that GeoJSON does the same, but not open with 'the winding order follows geojson'.

Reviewer 3: > then mention that GeoJSON does the same

concur

> - counterclockwise: the winding order of polygons follows the [GeoJSON spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7946#section-3.1.6). Polygon rings MUST follow the right-hand rule for orientation (counterclockwise external rings, clockwise internal rings).  Traversing vertices of rings in order, the interior of the polygon is on the left.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- counterclockwise: the winding order of polygons follows the [GeoJSON spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7946#section-3.1.6). All vertices of exterior polygon rings MUST be ordered in the counterclockwise direction and all interior rings MUST be ordered in the clockwise direction.
```

(opinion: "right-hand rule" is not helpful for interpretation; better to be explicit)

Reviewer: +1 - someone else on the thread also raised right-hand being confusing

> If no value is set, no assertions are made about winding order.

Reviewer: Great addition.

> If no value is set, no assertions are made about winding order, except that external rings have oppposite winding order to internal rings.

Reviewer 4: I would just shorthen this to
```suggestion
If no value is set, no assertions are made about winding order.
```
because there's really no guarantee that internal rings use a different winding order

> Writers should add the orientation attribute when it is applicable to the data.

Reviewer: +1

["Polygon", "MultiPolygon"]. Or if having 3D points, it is not sufficient to
specify "Point", but it is expected to list "Point Z".

#### orientation

This attribute indicates the winding order of polygons. The only available value is:

- "counterclockwise": All vertices of exterior polygon rings MUST be ordered in the counterclockwise direction and all interior rings MUST be ordered in the clockwise direction.

If no value is set, no assertions are made about winding order or consistency of such between exterior and interior rings or between individual geometries within a dataset.  Readers are responsible for verifying and if necessary re-ordering vertices as required for their analytical representation.

Writers are encouraged but not required to set orientation="counterclockwise" for portability of the data within the broader ecosystem.

> It is recommended to always set the orientation (to counterclockwise) if `edges` is 'spherical'.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is recommended to always set the orientation (to counterclockwise) if `edges` is 'spherical' (see below).
```

If no value is set, the default value to assume is 'planar'.

> Note if edges is spherical then it is recommended that `orientation` is always set to 'counterclockwise'. If it is not set 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note if `edges` is 'spherical' then it is recommended that `orientation` is always set to 'counterclockwise'. If it is not set, it is not clear how polygons should be interpreted within spherical coordinate systems, which can lead to major analytical errors if interpreted incorrectly. 
```

(per my comment, suggest dropping assumed behavior)

> then implementations should choose the smaller polygon for interpretation (but note this can only work with polygons 

Reviewer: Note I don't entirely understand this so was just trying to represent what @mentin said. If anyone (@rouault? @jorisvandenbossche?) could review / suggest changes that'd be great. But I also want to cut this release soon, and this feels like a pretty minor point, so we can also just come back and fix it in a 0.4)

Author: Personally, I don't really like the "choose the smaller polygon" approach. How does one compare the two polygons, with what error margin? It feels error-prone and as mentioned means we cannot have polygons larger than the hemisphere. How about for `orientation: spherical` the reader just assumes `orientation: counterclockwise`?

Reviewer 3: I think when this field is absent, the reader can make the most pragmatic choice for the reader, and we probably shouldn't make a recommendation about what that means here.  I think from a spec standpoint, having `edges: spherical` and lacking `orientation` gives the reader permission to reject these datasets outright instead of making any assumptions, if they so choose.  Or they can make their own stated assumptions about what to do when it is absent, but that is documentation on the reader side rather than the spec.

Author: Sounds good to me
